Hello friends
In this video let us learn how to construct binary
heap from an array
For an example let us take an array of seven
elements
That is from index 0 to 6
As we know the binary heap is a complete binary
tree which satisfies the heap ordering property
So here we need to logically construct a complete
binary tree using this array for that for every index
of the array we need to find its left and right
child so that we can construct the complete binary
tree Out of this array here Array index starts at
zero
Then the left child can be found in the index
two Indo I plus one and the right child can
be found in the index two Indo I plus two
Let us say how for Index zero the left child
will be in two into 0 plus one
That is index one which is the Element 20 and
the right child will be in two indo zero plus
two
That is index two which is Element 40
Similarly for index one the left child will be two
into one plus one that is index three which is
element 30 here and the right child will be in
index two into one plus two
That is index four which is Element 80
Similarly for index two the left child will be two
into 2 plus one
That is index five which is elements 60 and the
right child will be in index two into two plus
two that is index six which is Element 50 and
for index Three
The left child should be at index two into three
plus one that is seven and right
Child should be in index two Indo three plus two
that is eight
But these indices are not in the range so we
can stop the processing Now that is we can understand
that the next elements should be the leafs of the
tree
In this example we are going to construct a max heap
in max heap
The parent will always be larger than the Children
This is applicable for every sub tree and hence the
root of the tree will be the maximum
In a max heap so let us construct the max heap to
construct max heap or min heap
We need to satisfy the heap property from the bottom
most sub Tree
Here we are going to construct the Max heap so we
need to satisfy the max heap property from bottom Most sub
tree here which is the bottom most sub tree
It is the sub tree with node 40 who's left
Child is 60 and right Child is 50 and the
second bottom Most subtree Is this this node 28
with left child 30 and right child 80 and
the top most subtree is this one the node
10 with left child 20 and right child 40 So
first take the bottom most sub three check
If it satisfies the max heap property that is parent should
be greater than Children and the maximum value should be
at the root here The child 60 is greater than
parent 40 so swap 60 and 40 again We need
to check for the max heap property of the swapped index
But now 40 does'nt have any left or right child
so we can skip this now the maximum element 60
is placed in subtree's root Now it satisfies a
max heap property
Next consider the second bottom most sub tree Here child
80 is greater than parent 20 So swap 80 and
20 again
We need to check for the max heap property of the
swapped Index
But again 20 does'nt have left and right child
so we can skip this step
Now take the top Most sub tree Here child 80
is greater than parent ten So swap 80 and 10
again We need to check for the max heap property of
the swapped Index here 10 is root and 30 and
20 are its Children It Does'nt satisfy the max heap property
That is the root must be the maximum among all
the nodes Here 30 is greater than 10 and 20
to swap 30 and ten and again we need to
check for the max heap property of the swap index But
now 10 does'nt have left and right child so we
can skip this and our heapify process is
done for all sub trees from bottom Most node now
this complete tree exactly satisfy some Max heap property
The maximum element 80 is present at the root and
every sub Tree's root value is the maximum of its
Children
So this is how we can construct a heap from
an array
Now let us see how to implement this as we
discussed the procedure to construct the heap first find a
bottom most sub tree and from the bottom most sub
tree to top check and satisfy the heap property
Here we have two functions
First is built Heap which will call the heapify
function to satisfy the heap property from the bottom
Most node and the heapify function will find
the left and right nodes and arranges it based on
the heap property
First let us understand the built heap function
The array and the last index of the array passed
into this function
Total seven here and the size is the last index
of the array that is seven minus one which is
equal to six
And as we discussed the built heap function will call
the heapify function from the bottom
Most node
In general we can get the bottom most node using
size by two
So this for loop will run from size by 2
to 0 that is bottom most sub tree root
to Index zero that is top most sub tree root
node
For every sub tree index it will call the heapify
function so now size by two is equal
to six by two which is equal to three
So heapify function is called with index three
along with the array and size six
So here index equal to a three and size equal
to six
Let us first find the left and right child of
the node at this index so left equal to two
Indo Index plus one that is two Indo three plus
one which is equal to seven
And now let us find the right child right equal
to left plus one that is seven plus one which
is equal to eight
Initially we keep the max and index at the same
index
If the max heap property is not satisfied Max index will
be changed
If Max and Index still point to the same index after
the left and right value checking it means this sub tree
obeys the max heap property
So whenever Max is not equal to index swap the
element and called the heapify function with Max
Index again let's see how this works
So here max equal to index three
now check if left and right child is greater
than this node so we have if left less than
are equal to size and arr of left greater than
arr  of max
But this fails as left seven is not less than
or equal to size so check the next if it
also fails
Since right Index eight is also not less than or
equal to size
Now check If Max was updated it hasn't so if
failed again
And this function is completed now and control gets back
to build heap function here in next iteration of the
for loop i is equal two and heapify is
called bypassing arr  I equal to two and size equal
to six
So here in this function index is equal to two and
size equal to six
Let us first find the left and right Children of
node at this index
So left equal to two Indo Index plus one that
is two into two plus one which is five and
right equal to left plus one that is six And
as we said initially we keep the max and index
at the same position
So Max equal to
index two that is we are assuming that this
sub tree satisfies the heap property And if any child
is greater than parent we update Max
And finally if Max and index at different we have
to perform swap operation
So now Max equal to two
Now check if left child is greater than this node
So we have if left less than or equal to
size and arr  of left greater than arr  of Max
And we have five less than size and 60 greater
than 40
So left child is greater than parent so update Max
So Max equal to left
Now that is index five now chek if right child
is greater than Max
So we have if right less than or equal to size
and arr  of right greater than arr  of Max
And we have six equal to size and 50 not
greater than 60
So it fails and see
Now we have the maximum value of this sub Tree
at Max
So we have found the maximum value of this sub
tree
Now we have to rearrange it so
check
If Max was updated that is Max was initially set
to index now check
If Max and Index are the same and it is
not so if conditions is true so swap elements at
Max and Index that is 60 and 40 are swapped
so that the maximum element is now at the root
position again we need to check for the max heap property of the
swapped Index
So call heapify again bypassing array max and
size
So here index equal to five and size equel to
six let us
First find the left and right Children of node at
this index so left equal to two INDO Index plus
one that this two Indo five plus one which is
11 and right equal to left plus one that is
12 and set max equal to index that is five
now
Now chek if left and right child is greater than
this node
So we have if left less than or equal to
size and arr  of left greater than arr  of max
But this fails as left
11 is not less than or equal to size
Six
So check the next if it also fails since right index
12 is also not less than or equal to size
now chek
If Max was updated and it was not so if
failed again and the function is completed and control gets
back to built heap function and here in next iteration
i is equal to one and heapify is called
bypassing array  arr i equal to one and size equal to
six
So here index equal to one and size equal to
Now let us find the left and right Children of node
at this Index
So left equal to two indo index plus one that is
two into one plus one which is three and right
equal to left plus one which is four
And as we said initially we will keep the max
and index at the same position
So Max equal to index one that is we are
assuming that this sub tree satisfies the heap property
And this value at this node is the maximum value
So now Max equal to one
And now check If left child is greater than this
node
And here we have three less than size and 30
greater than 20 that is the left child is greater
than parent
So update Max and Max equal left Now that
is three now chek if right child is greater than Max
So we have if right less than or equal to
size and arr  of right greater than arr  of Max
and we have four less than size
So first conditions satisfy
And next we have 20 greater than 30
So that is also satisfied
That is right Child is greater than current Max value
so it should be updated
So Set Max equal to right that is four and
see
Now we have the maximum value of this sub tree
at Max now
check
If Max was updated that is max was initially set
to index now check
If Max and Index are the same and it is
not that means we have to perform swap operation since
we have found a greater element at child position
So swap elements at Max and Index that is 80
and 20
So now the maximum element is at the root position
Again we need to check for the max heap property of
the swapped index
so call heapify again by passing away
max and size
So here index equal to four and size equal to
six
Let us first find the left and right Children of
the node at this Index so Left equal to two INDO
index plus one that is two into four plus one
which is nine and right equal to left plus one
that is 10 and now set max equal to index
That is four now check if any child is greater
than parent
So we have if left less than or equal to
size and arr  of left greater than arr  of max
But it fails as left
Nine is not less than or equal to size so
check the next if it also fails since right index
ten is also not less than or equal to size
Now Chek
If Max was updated and it was not so it
fails and the function is now completely executed and controlled
gets back to build heap function
And here in next iteration i is equal to zero and
heapify is called by passing array arr
I equal to zero and size equal to six
So here index equal to zero and size equal to
six
Let us first find the left and right child of
node at this index the left equal to two Indu
index plus one that is two indu zero plus one
which is one and right equal to left plus one
that is two
And as we set first we are assuming that this
sub tree satisfies the heap property
So keep Max and Index at the same position
And if any child is greater than parent we will
update Max
So finally if Max and index are different we have to
performs swap operation
So right now Max equal to zero
Now Chek if left child is greater than this node
So we have if left less than or equal to
size and arr  of left greater than Max
And we have one less than size and 80 greater
than 10
So left child is greater than parent so update Max
Max equal to left
Now that is one now chek if right child is
greater than Max So we have if right less than or
equal to size and arr  of right greater than arr
of Max and we have two less than size But
60 is not greater than 80
So if fails and see now we have the maximum
value of this sub tree at Max
Now chek If Max was updated that is Max was
initially set to index now check If Max and index are
the same but max equal to two and index equal
to zero So it is not the same
So if conditions is true now so swap elements at
Max and Index that is 80 and 10
Now the maximum element is at the root position Again
we need to check for the max heap property for the
swapped Index
So call heapify again bypassing array Max and
size
So here index equal to one and size equal to
six
now let us find The left and right child of the
node at this index so left equal to two indu
index plus one that is two into one plus one
which is three and right equal to left plus one
that is four now set max equal to index That
is one now chek if left and right child is
greater than this node So we have if left less
than or equal to size an arr  of left greater than
arr  of max and left three is less than size
and arr of left 30 is greater than an arr  of
max 10 So update Max that is set Max to
left that is three now chek the right child
We have right four less than size but arr  of
right 20 is not greater than arr  of max 30
So if fails now chek
If Max was updated and it was so swap elements
at Max and Index and again we need to check
for Max heap property for the Swapped Index
So call heapify
again bypassing array max and size
So here index equal to three and size equal to
six
Now let us find the left and right child of the
node at this index so left equal to two Indo
Index plus one that is two into three plus one
which is seven and right equal to left plus one
that is eight and set max equal to index that
is Tree
Now Chek if left and right child is greater than
this node
But if fails as left seven is not Less than or equal to
size and the next if also fails
Since right Index eight is also not less than or
equal to size and the next if also fails since
Max was not updated so the function is completed now
and control gets back to built heap and in the
next iteration i equal to minus one and the condition I
greater than or equal to zero fails and control comes
out of the for
Loop and see
Now this complete tree exactly satisfies the max heap property
The maximum Element 80 is present at the root and
every sub trees root value this maximum of its Children
So that is how we can construct a binary heap
from an array
We learned how to construct a heap
We have to find the bottom most sub tree and
from the bottom most sub tree to top we have
to check and satisfy the heap property
That is for Max heap
The parent should be greater than its Children and from
min heap
The parent should be smaller than its Children and we
also learned how to implement it
And in implementation we have two functions
First build heap which will call the heapify
function to satisfy the heap property from the bottom
Most node and the heapify function will find the
left and right nodes and arranges it based on the
heap property
And finally we will have the complete tree which satisfies
the heap property
So that's all
And in the next video we will learn how to remove the max element from the max element.